1. Submission type: presentation

2. Category: developer

3. Bio:

Alison Chaiken
Mentor Graphics

Alison works for Mentor Graphics Embedded Software Division in
Fremont, CA although most recently she has developed automotive Linux
in Germany.  Her automotive Linux career began at Nokia, where she
ported MeeGo-IVI to the Pandaboard.  Previous speaking experience
includes ELC, ELCE, Automotive Linux Summit, Southern California Linux
Expo, Maker Faire and many local Linux user groups. Alison has
been using POSIX variants for "personal productivity" since BSD 4.3.
Her now dimly remembered physics career started at MIT and included
stints at Hewlett-Packard and Stanford.  She disorganizes the
1000+-member Silicon Automotive Open Source Group and is a founder of
Hacker Dojo.

Assya Raskin
Mentor Graphics


4. Abstract:

Beyond the sandbox: the many embedded uses of virtualization

Embedded engineers employ virtualization to isolate programs, provide
a clean build environment, or visualize how an application looks on
unavailable HW. For ARM, the Qemu emulator only supports VExpress
CPU. A new Freescale i.MX6 emulator based on transaction-level
modeling extends Qemu and highlights additional applications for
embedded VMs. VMs that support TLM add IEEE-standard SystemC libraries
can emulate multicore or find HW bugs. Changing out the emulator's
device-tree allows testing on a variety of virtual targets. Modifying
the rootfs enables the bisection of a bug against an entire runtime
environment.  Running many VM instances in parallel offers a speed
increase for regression testing.  A demo of the i.MX6 VM will be
followed by a discussion of how to match virtualization methods to
problems.

5. Audience: build-release and QA engineers who are curious about
virtualization but think it's irrelevant to their job assignment.
Also virtualization fans who know about LXC, Qemu and KVM but have
never heard of transaction-level modelling.  

6. How the abstract will help better the Linux community: by provoking
the audience to think anew, for themselves, how they might use VMs to
improve their workflow.  Enterprise developers have completed this
exercise, but virtualization is still not fully integrated into
embedded.

7. Experience level: intermediate.  Anyone who has ever heard of Qemu or
ARM should be able to glean some ideas.

8. Technical requirements: none.  My demo involves the ever-popular
text-mode boot of a virtual machine.
