Up to 500 words

Fair Trade, Ecosystem Services and FLOSS

FLOSS licenses are a mechanism with which developer communities have attempted
to encourage if not compel participation and back-contribution from the
consumers of software.  There is general agreement that these attempts have met
with mixed success.

Ecosystem services are the economic and ecological benefits that the natural
environment produces, often in a manner that is taken for granted.  These
services typically go unnoticed until accumulated degradation causes them to
fail, sometimes suddenly and spectacularly.  In the realm of FLOSS software and
hardware, the projects protected under the auspices of the Linux Foundation's
Core Infrastructure Initiative are arguably analogous to ecosystem services.
CII is an attempt to preserve the viability of these crucial but sometimes
obscure projects.  However, CII focuses (sensibly) on cybersecurity and does not
consider the vast array of other libraries and applications.  Biodiversity is
another concept from environmental sciences that has a direct analog in
software.  Multiple library and application providers with similar functionality
make the software distributions and embedded products that rely on them more
resilient to single-point failures.

According to the Fairtrade Labeling Organization, "Fair trade is a trading
partnership, based on dialogue, transparency, and respect, that seeks greater
equity in international trade."  Why shouldn't this principle also apply to
software developers?  FLOSS software is arguably both "artisanal" and
"hand-made," but a claim that FLOSS is "ethically produced" would have to rely
on guidelines to which software should adhere.  Such standards could include
features like easier-to-understand user agreements, transparent and granular
control of data, use of standard APIs to prevent vendor lock-in, support of
diversity and education, and internationalization support.  We live in era of
growing suspicion about the trustworthiness of large, multinational
corporations that produce many commonly used applications.  Might FLOSS
supporters make the case that socially responsible investors and consumers
should care about ethically produced software?

What lessons can FLOSS take away from the environmental and Fair Trade movements
about novel funding models?  The environmental sustainability movement has found
some success by striking development deals with former enemies that make use of
the concept of "credits" and "offsets."  Often credits and offsets are
resellable and tradeable. The most striking feature of these agreement is that
business and environmental-preservation communities who do not share many values
can make common cause in order to achieve goals that serve both.
