_New Economy of Nature_ by Gretchen Reynolds

P. 1-2: in 1993, "36 million Americans were drinking water from systems violating PA standards."

P. 3: "NYC's water has never passed through a filtration plant." P. 4: "the city would spend the much smaller amountof about 1.5B to protect the upstate watershed." Observers may blame climate change for newly arisen problems that potentially arise from unrelated causes.

P. 5: "ecosystems can be seen as capital assets, supplying human beings with a stream of services that sustain and enhance our lives."

P.7: "we haven't even taken measure of the ecosystem capital stocks that produce these most vital of labors."

P. 8: "'Stanford biologist Peter Vitousek has said, 'we're the first generation with tools to understand changes in the earth's system caused by human activity, and the last with the opportunity to influnce the course of many of the changes now rapidly underway.'"

P. 9: "Nobel Laureate Kenneth Arrow . . . has for decades been disturbed by the way that economics dismisses 'externalities' . . . 'Internalization' of such externalities - enactment of a fair system of pricing and payment - is badly needed . . ."

p. 10: "'We stop viewing the environment as an amenity, a luxury that the poor can't afford.'" -- Partha Dasgupta, Cambridge

P. 10: "economics is more concerned with orice than value"

p. 11: "ecosystem services are treated as public goods, which if provided for one are provided for all, no matter who pays." -- economist Ronald Coates

P. 13: "Establishing ownership of natural capital and services allows bargaining . . . 'Without prices being set, Nature becomed like an all-you can-eat buffet'" -- Richard Sandor

P. 71: "It's not so much that the road to hell is paved with good intentions, but that the road to hell is paved."

P. 74: Chris Meyer of NYPIRG on public hearings: "like a rolling Thansgiving dinner with relatives you only want to see once a year."

P. 77: "Whereas Kennedy's view implied that property owners had an obligation to society to act as stewards of the environmental assets on their land, -- although they might be compensated for their costs -- Heelan's suggested that buying land entails the purchase of an uncontestable right to pollute." Does buying a vehicle entail an uncontestable right to pollute the air, endangervL VRUs and tip the planet into climate catastrophe?
